Restore important guidance, improve legacy support (#398)
APIs-guru/graphql-over-http: spec/GraphQLOverHTTP.md

The client MUST include the media type `application/graphql-response+json` in
the `Accept` header.

:: A _legacy client_ is a client that does not support responses using the
`application/graphql-response+json` media type, and thus does not conform to

> this specification.

Author: Added definition for you @martinbonnin

header, and SHOULD indicate the encoding (e.g.
`application/graphql-response+json; charset=utf-8`).

A server MUST support responses using the `application/graphql-response+json`
media type.

:: A _legacy server_ is a _server_ that does not support responses using the
`application/graphql-response+json` media type, and thus does not conform to

> this specification.

Author: Moved this higher, introduced `legacy server` terminology.

Reviewer: love the definition 👍. Should we also define `legacy client`?

Author: If we refer to the term sufficiently to need it. Definitions like this only really matter when you reference them (via `_legacy server_` for example) as they become the target for when you click on the linked term.

specification, when a client does not include at least one supported media type
in the `Accept` HTTP header, the server MUST either:

1. Disregard the `Accept` header and respond with the server's choice of media
   type; OR
1. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the
   request.

If the `Accept` header does not indicate support for
`application/graphql-response+json` but does indicate support for
`application/json`, the server MUST either:

1. Respond with the `application/graphql-response+json` media type
   (RECOMMENDED); OR
1. Respond with the `application/json` media type as detailed in
   [Appendix A](#sec-Appendix-application-json-responses) (RECOMMENDED if
   support for legacy clients is desired); OR
1. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the

>    request (NOT RECOMMENDED).

Author: This is the main change: we explicitly state that you should respond to `Accept: application/json` with `Content-Type: application/graphql-response+json` _or_ implement the appendix, and that responding 406 Not Acceptable is not recommended.

Note: Prior to this specification, the media type `application/json` was in wide
use for the HTTP response payload type. With this media type, clients cannot
trust responses from the server that do not use an HTTP `2xx` status code (since
these replies may come from non-compliant HTTP servers or proxies somewhere in
the request chain), hence the introduction of
`application/graphql-response+json`. Legacy clients, utilities and tooling may
continue to issue `Accept: application/json`, so to maintain interoperability it
is recommended to continue to serve these requests.

If the `Accept` header is present but does not indicate support for any of the
server's supported media types, it is RECOMMENDED to respond with
`406 Not Acceptable`.

> 

Author: This restores the previous `406 Not Acceptable` recommendation from the previous text, which we no longer apply to `application/json`.

Reviewer: Sounds reasonnable to me.

Reviewer 2: Note that this text here already indicates the _recommended_ behavior when the requested media type(s) are not supported.  So restating it in regards to `application/json` handling is redundant.

Author: @Shane32 does it? I specifically removed the previous recommendations - these ones:

> In alignment with the [HTTP 1.1 Accept](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-5.3.2) specification, when a client does not include at least one supported media type in the `Accept` HTTP header, the server MUST either:
>
> 1. Disregard the `Accept` header and respond with the server's choice of media type ~~(NOT RECOMMENDED)~~; OR
> 1. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the request ~~(RECOMMENDED)~~.

Did I mention it somewhere else?

Author: OH! You mean because I told how to handle `application/json`... You're right, I missed the word "Otherwise" - will add.

Author: I went a different way, the Otherwise didn't work well after a Note and moving the note didn't work well. Result:

> If the `Accept` header is present but indicates support for neither any of the server's supported media types nor `application/json`, it is RECOMMENDED to respond with `406 Not Acceptable`.

Author: I've reworked this whole section.

specification, when a client does not include at least one supported media type
in the `Accept` HTTP header, the server MUST either:

1. Disregard the `Accept` header and respond with the server's choice of media
   type; OR
1. Respond with a `406 Not Acceptable` status code and stop processing the
   request (RECOMMENDED); OR
2. Disregard the `Accept` header and respond with the server's choice of media

>    type (NOT RECOMMENDED).

Reviewer: 👍

`application/graphql-response+json` but does indicate support for

> `application/json`, the server MUST either:

Reviewer 2: This could be improved.  What if the request came in as `Accept: multipart/mixed, application/json;q=0.9`?  A server may wish to support `@stream` and `@defer` via `multipart/mixed` rather than responding along the lines below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During response content negotiation, a server MUST support `application/json` as follows:
```

Reviewer 2: Note that this paragraph and subsequent numbered items seems a little overstated, with little force.  Can we simplify it a bit?  The text above for the primary response type is clear and well stated (quoted below).

> A server MUST support responses using the `application/graphql-response+json`
media type.

The server _supports_ the type.  But the server is allowed to process the accept header as it sees fit considering any other formats it may support.  Maybe this paragraph and the subsequent list could be consolidated into a single sentence:

```suggestion
During response content negotiation, a server SHOULD support `application/json`
such that, when `application/json` is selected, the server responds either with
`application/graphql-response+json` or, when support for legacy clients is desired,
with `application/json` as detailed in
[Appendix A](https://github.com/graphql/graphql-over-http/pull/398/changes#sec-Appendix-application-json-responses).
```

(and removing the subsequent list)

There's no reason to say it MUST support it, if one of the options is to respond with 406.  And the server should be free to choose its own default format.

Author: You're right, this is overreaching and not what I intended; I've reworked the entire section.

depending on the concrete error condition.

Otherwise, the status code to use depends on the media type with which the
GraphQL response will be served.

For legacy `application/json` responses, see
[Appendix A](#sec-Appendix-application-json-responses).

### application/graphql-response+json

This section only applies when the response body uses the
`application/graphql-response+json` media type.

Clients should process the response as a well-formed _GraphQL response_
independent of the HTTP status code, and should read the response body
(specifically {data} and {errors}) to determine the status of the response.

Note: With `application/graphql-response+json`, clients know the response is
well formed and should determine the detailed status of the response from the
response body alone, allowing server authors to adopt more appropriate status
codes without impacting behavior of existing clients. Intermediary servers may
use the status code to determine the status of the _GraphQL response_ without
needing to process the response body; this is useful in request logs, developer
tooling, anomaly and intrusion detection, metrics and observability, API

> gateways, and more.

Author: This is critical content that #379 dropped. If the client depends on status code then server admins cannot change status codes without risking breaking clients. For example, a naive server that responds to all non-data requests with `400` might not be able to later move to more nuanced codes such as `408 Request Timeout` or `429 Too Many Requests` if the client specifically checks status codes. Further, if we later expand this specification to allow responding with more mutation-centric status codes (`201 Created`, `202 Accepted`, `409 Conflict`, etc) then clients that depend on `response.statusCode === 200` may change behavior.

**It is vital for future expansion that the client should ignore status codes.**

Reviewer: How do you recommend dealing with authorization? I have seen a fair amount of GraphQL APIs that rely on `401` to tell the client to refresh a token. Is that discouraged now?

Author: A 401 with `application/graphql-response+json`? I've not seen that myself - normally that level of authentication happens at a higher middleware layer that doesn't yet process GraphQL (and is one of the contributing factors for the need for the `application/graphql-response+json` media type, since they commonly do respond in JSON for APIs).

Should the endpoint return a 401 with `application/graphql-response+json`, the `errors` array should indicate the authn issue too. I don't think there should ever be information in the status code that isn't present in the response body?

Reviewer: I just checked the Buffer API and it's doing this:

```
$ curl -H "Accept: application/graphql-response+json" -v --json '{ "query": "{__typename}"}' https://api.buffer.com
< HTTP/2 401
< date: Wed, 06 May 2026 08:26:40 GMT
< content-type: application/graphql-response+json; charset=utf-8
<
{"errors":[{"message":"An authentication JWT or Access Token is required","extensions":{"code":"UNAUTHENTICATED"}}]}
```

Like you said, it also sets the error in the errors array. 

It's just painful as a client dev because every REST token refresh logic is using HTTP 401. I'm pretty sure lots of folks are relying on that right now as it's also easier than going into the errors array and checking extensions.

All in all, I wouldn't say clients should ignore the status code. They should not rely on it to determine whether the GraphQL response is well formed but it's still an information available to the client.

Author: Good find - I wasn't aware of that usage!

The application can handle the status code _before_ passing it to the GraphQL client to be processed as a GraphQL response. The GraphQL client itself (URQL, Relay, Apollo Client, Graffle, etc) wouldn't normally be the one handling token refresh flows - that's normally a "link", "middleware", "exchange", or similar that the application developer inserts into the network chain and may not even process the response body.

Also: it's a SHOULD not a MUST. I think it's important that the GraphQL clients themselves ignore HTTP status codes, otherwise changing status codes could become a breaking change.

Reviewer: > - that's normally a "link", "middleware", "exchange",

Exactly. Apollo Kotlin does this using interceptors but it's the same concept really.

I guess there are 2 different mental models when it comes to clients:

1. Apollo Client is a "client"
2. A website is a "client"

In the context of this spec, I think of "client" mainly as 2.: everything that is one side of the network boundary, including links, interceptors, etc... 

Suggestion to remove the part about "status of the response". I don't think we have that language anywhere else and this lets type-2 clients deal with well-formed responses the way they want:

```suggestion
Clients should process the response as a well-formed _GraphQL response_
independent of the HTTP status code.

Note: With `application/graphql-response+json`, clients know the response is
well formed and should determine the detailed status of the response from the
response body alone, allowing server authors to adopt more appropriate status
codes without impacting behavior of existing clients. Intermediary servers may
use the status code to determine the status of the _GraphQL response_ without
needing to process the response body; this is useful in request logs, developer
tooling, anomaly and intrusion detection, metrics and observability, API
gateways, and more.
```

(That diff is large but only the first sentence is touched)

Reviewer 2: Just FYI, GraphQL.NET Server responds with 401 and a well-formed GraphQL response (including an appropriate error) when the developer enables a schema-wide authorization policy but no authorization token is provided (or it is invalid), and 403 with a well-formed GraphQL response when the authorization policy is not met -- before parsing the document or validating the request.

Additionally, during the GraphQL document validation phase, if a referenced type/field requires authentication, or if a type/field requries an authorization role/policy not held by the client, the error is added to any other validation errors, and the status code is set to 401 / 403 as appropriate.

In this way, clients may examine the status code for 401/403 and handle it prior to the GraphQL client pipeline, as the execution has not yet begun.  Or they may process the response as a well-formed GraphQL response.

Reviewer 2: I'd also like to remind us that we've designed it so 4xx within `application/graphql-response+json` means that the execution has not yet started.  So if the status code can provide any identifiable meaning to a client, it should be free to use that information and bypass processing the full GraphQL response.  Only 2xx means that there is data (full or partial) available.  Right?

Still fine to say that a GraphQL client should ignore the status code; if you're assuming that 'client' means 'client library' and excludes auth or other layers added by the developer.

Reviewer: > if you're assuming that 'client' means 'client library' and excludes auth or other layers added by the developer.

If we do assume this, we should add a proper definition. My hunch is that it's going to be very hard to define.

Author: You could say similar of server: is it everything the other side of the internet or is it just the GraphQL handling part. For server we’ve been explicit it’s just the GraphQL handling part and have explicitly called out that there are middlewares/intermediaries that may need to be traversed to get there (and that may behave differently). Maybe we need to either do the same for the client, or even broaden our definition so that middlewares/etc includes client-side middleware - they’re a pretty common fixture across clients so I think it’s reasonable to constrain the domain of client:

```mermaid
flowchart TB
  GraphQLClient --> ClientMiddleware
  ClientMiddleware --> Internet
  Internet --> ServerMiddleware
  ServerMiddleware --> GraphQLServer

```

```mermaid
flowchart TB
  GraphQLClient --> Middleware
  Middleware --> GraphQLServer
```

Reviewer: > Maybe we need to either do the same for the client, or even broaden our definition so that middlewares/etc includes client-side middleware - they’re a pretty common fixture across clients

Works for me 👍 
I think this is worth being made explicit. That mermaid graph helped a lot. Would be cool to have it in the spec.

If we're being pedantic, there is also something at the top and bottom of this graph:

```mermaid
flowchart TB
  FrontendLogic --> GraphQLClient
  GraphQLClient --> ClientMiddleware
  ClientMiddleware --> Internet
  Internet --> ServerMiddleware
  ServerMiddleware --> GraphQLServer
  GraphQLServer --> BackendLogic
```

The `FrontendLogic` might use the HTTP status code. We have APIs in Apollo Kotlin to expose this. This was requested in multiple occasions.

I still think we should drop `and should read the response body (specifically {data} and {errors}) to determine the status of the response`. It introduces new language that is not really necessary IMO.

In case of errors that completely prevent the generation of a well-formed
_GraphQL response_, the server SHOULD respond with the appropriate status code
depending on the concrete error condition.

Otherwise, the status code to use depends on the media type with which the
GraphQL response will be served.

For legacy `application/json` responses, see
[Appendix A](#sec-Appendix-application-json-responses).

### application/graphql-response+json

This section only applies when the response body uses the

> `application/graphql-response+json` media type.

Author: There's a strong likelihood of us supporting more media types over time (e.g. JSONL or multipart or SSE for incremental delivery), so I believe the section header is still warranted. Further; without it the text contradicts the appendix.

Reviewer: Sounds good 👍
